In computer-aided orthopedic pre-operative planning, the outer surface of bone piece needs to be extracted and the bone surface needs to be segmented. Point cloud segmentation methods, based on supervised learning, are time-consuming. A semi-supervised method is proposed to semantically segment the point cloud by incorporating both consistent regularization and proxy label. This method keeps the results with higher probability from the output of student network as proxy labels for unlabeled data. Then, the selected proxy labels are compared with the output of teacher network. Thus, student network is trained. Next, the parameters of teacher network are updated concurrently with respect to student network. The experiments demonstrate that using 10% labeled data can be comparable to 100% labeled data in accuracy. The extraction of bone piece outer surface reached 84.2%, and the femur surface segmentation reached 94.3%. Our method reduces data annotation and improves the accuracy of traditional methods.

Inspired by the idea of FixMatch, the state-of-art semi-supervised learning method for 2D image classification that proposed confidence-based filtering to improve proxy label quality. We cited this strategy to train the point cloud segmentation network. AS shown in Figure 3, the total segmentation network architecture total loss consists of supervised loss and unsupervised loss, i.e., labeled loss and unlabeled loss, respectively. where the supervised loss is obtained by calculating the cross-entropy function from the data with labels and the output of the student network; The unsupervised loss is first calculated by the student network with the proxy labels of the unlabeled data, and then the cross-entropy function is calculated with the output of the teacher network. The teacher network parameters are passed by the student network through a sliding exponential average(EMA). 